So how do function calls work.
Functions use an area in
memory called the 'function
call stack' or program stack.
A stack is analogous to a stack
of books or a stack of dishes.
If you place a book on top of the
stack, then you must remove that
book before removing any others.
This is referred to as
last in first out or LIFO.
Stacks also use the terms push
when you put an item on top of the
stack and pop when you remove an
item from the top of the stack.
In the case of a c++ program,
these items are called stack
frames or activation records.
All it is, is a collection of
information that represents
an active function.
So this is where parameters
are stored, local variables,
the return address and more.
Each time a function is called, an
activation record is created, and
it's pushed onto the call stack.
When the function terminates, we
pop its activation record off the
call stack, and now the top of the
stack is the function that just
called the one we just popped off.
The call stack works in
a very orderly manner.
You can't jump into or out
of the middle of the stack.
You must follow the lifo rules.
Also remember that the call
stack is finite in size.
If you activate too many functions
on the call stack, then it's
possible to run out of stack space.
This results in a stack
overflow error, which is usually
an unrecoverable error and
your program will terminate.
The best way to understand
how function calls work
is to show you visually.
Let's do that now.
In order to understand how function
calls work, we really need to
understand how memory is laid out.
Here, let's say that this is
the memory for our program.
It's divided into segments.
So here, we've got the code area.
This is where the code resides.
Then we've got an area for static
variables or for global variables.
That's where they're
stored right here.
And here's the area for the stack.
This is the function call stack.
And this is what we're really
concerned about in this video.
So this is the area I'm going
to concentrate on in this video.
Then we've got another area
in memory here called the
heap or the free store.
We'll talk a lot about this area
when we talk about pointers and
dynamic memory allocation. So in
this video, keep in mind that what
I'm talking about is this area right
here, that's the function call stack.
So when we call functions and they
finish and they pop off the stack,
this is what we're talking about,
this area in memory right here.
Okay, so I'm in the IDE.
And I'm in the section 11 workspace in
the how function calls work project.
And I've got a real simple example
here that I'm going to walk
through in detail in a second.
But before I do that, let's
concentrate and look at
what typically happens when
one function calls another.
So I've written it out here, and this
is not the only way to achieve this.
There's a lot of different
ways to get to the same end.
But this is what typically happens.
So suppose I have a main and that
main calls a function called func1.
That's what's happening here.
I've got main and it's calling func1.
Okay, and what happens?
Well, main pushes space on the stack.
Remember, everything here
is based on the stack.
For the return value that
function func1 is going to
return something to main.
Main is the one that needs to get that
result once that function is done.
We need to push space for
the parameters that are
being passed in if any.
In this case, we've got
two right here x and y.
And we need to push
the return address.
That's important because function1
needs to know where to come back to.
Then we transfer control
over to function1, which is
basically an assembly language
instruction called jump.
You just jump over there, and
you're you're off and running,
so control is transferred.
Now on function1 side, it
pushes the address of the
previous activation record.
That's basically
moving a stack pointer.
That way you know where
the top of the stack is.
You push any register values
that need to be restored.
Then you perform the
code in function1.
When the code is finished, you
restore the register values that
way main is where it was before.
You restore the previous activation
record, right, you basically pop
all this stuff off the stack.
You store any function result
where main wants it, you can
see main gave you the address.
And you transfer control back to main.
So you jump back to that return
address that main pushed.
On main side now, remember,
function1 is now done.
So main knows where the
parameters are, and it knows
where the return values are.
So it needs to pop that information
off the stack to clear up the stack
and also grab those values if it can.
Okay, so this is the general flow.
We're not going to cover
all the details here.
I'm more interested in
the parameter side of it.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going
to walk through this example, and I'll
draw a function call stack over here.
And we'll go through it in detail,
so you can see exactly what's going
on from the parameter perspective.
I'm not going to worry about stack
pointers and static links and
dynamic links and all the stuff
that's on an activation record.
But more generally, let's worry
about the parameter passing so you
can really understand what's going
on because it's important that you
understand this, especially when
we learn about recursion later on.
Okay, so let's walk
through this example.
Program execution starts at domain.
So main is going to be activated.
It's got a function activation
record because it is a function.
So let's assume here main
is on the stack already.
And main has an x, it's
got a y and it's got a z.
So we need space for
those local variables.
You can see x is initialized
to 10, y is initialized to
20 and z is 0, in this case.
Okay, so now main is right here,
we're executing this piece of
code, z equals function1 with x y.
So we're calling function1.
So what happens is main
stops what it's doing.
It allocates space for x y.
And I'm just going
do this conceptually.
So we don't waste a lot of
time dealing with the stack
and pointers and things.
But let's suppose that at
this point, we get -- we're
going to push an activation
record on here for function1.
And this is a little different
from the example I showed you
that i just walked through but
it's a little easier to draw.
So this is where we're at.
So now we're at function1.
Function1 is now on the stack, and
we need space for a, b, and result.
Okay, so let's say we've got a,
we've got b and we've got result.
We're doing pass by value here.
So what's going to happen is the
x hooks up with the a and the
y hooks up with the b, right?
There's your actual formal
correspondence here.
So x is 10 and that
goes copied into the a.
Y is 20, in this case.
So we're going to copy that to the b.
Okay, so this is where
we're at right now.
Now let me clear a
little bit of this up.
All right, so that's
where we're at now.
Now we start executing
this function, function1.
So it's going to add a and b.
Okay, so that would be 20 plus 10.
So this gives me a 30.
And it's going to store that
value into result right here.
So now result gets a 30.
Originally result was 0, right,
because I zeroed it out here.
I didn't write it on here
but you get the idea here.
Now we're going to call function2, and
we're going to pass in result a and b.
Okay, so again, let's stop
what we're doing here.
We need to come back
and finish this code.
So we're here, and now
we're activating function2.
And all along those stack
pointers are moving along here.
This is the part that I'm not
going to worry about drawing here.
Okay, so now we're in function2.
We need space for x y and z.
But notice x is a reference parameter.
Okay, so we'll have to deal with that.
So we've got x y and z.
All right, so let's do x y and z.
All right, let's do y and z first.
We're going to pass those by value.
What is y and z.
Well, we've got 3 here.
We've got result, which is
corresponding to x, a corresponds
to y and b corresponds to z, right.
So y gets the value of a.
The value of a was 10,
so y is going to get 10.
And z gets the value of b.
So b was 20, z is going to be 20.
Okay, now let's talk about
that reference parameter.
Remember, when we talked about
reference parameters, we said
that there were aliases, right.
So in this case, x is an
alias for result right here.
So x is an alias for result.
So any changes I make to x, result
will be updated, right, because
that's the whole idea, that's the
whole point of pass by reference.
Now we start executing this code.
The code says x equals
x plus y plus z.
That's what that means right there.
Okay, so we've got y and z
here, which are 10 and 20.
So this becomes 10 plus 20.
And then what's x.
Well, x is a reference to result.
Result is 30.
So we're going to grab the 30
and add those two together.
That gives us 60.
So now we're going to say x equals 60.
Well, again, x is an alias for result.
So what we're doing is we're
updating that guy to 60 right here.
Okay, now function2 is done.
So what happens, it gets
popped off the stack.
So let's do that.
So function2 is now gone from here.
All that's gone.
I'm back in function1.
Well, where did function1 leave off.
It left off right here.
We're back from the function call now.
So it needs to return result.
What's result 60.
Where is it going to return
result two? Right here.
Remember, result right there is
the result of that function call.
So what I'm going to do here is I'm
basically going to say z equals 60.
So that's what's happening here.
I'm popping off the stack now.
So function1 is done.
All this is gone.
I'm back to main, and all main
has to do is that one output
statement right here, which
displays z, and z is now 60.
And the program's done.
Okay, so this gives you an
idea of conceptually what's
going on with function calling.
Now I skipped a lot of these
steps here on purpose, because
there's a lot to draw and it
gets really, really cluttered.
But think about all this
as function call overhead.
You really don't have to
worry about pushing registers
and transferring control.
All that's done for
you by the compiler.
But there is a certain amount
of function call overhead here.
So let's run this program and
see that we indeed get a 60.
And there it is, there's the result.
Your 60.
Okay, so hopefully, this works.
We'll do this again when
we talk about recursion.
That's when a function calls a function
calls a function calls itself.
So it's really important to
understand what's going on
with the stack call frame.
So we really know what's what's being
passed and what's being returned.
And you can see here that if we
don't have a way to unwind to get
back to where we were, we could just
really just run out of memory right
and get a stack overflow error.